Running a Dataverse dev environment with Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) (#10608)
IQSS/dataverse: doc/sphinx-guides/source/developers/windows.rst

- You must have jq installed: https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/

One the above is all set you can move on to :doc:`/container/dev-usage` in the Container Guide.

Running Dataverse in Windows WSL
--------------------------------

It is possible to run Dataverse in Windows 10 and 11 through WSL (Windows subsystem for Linux)

Install WSL
~~~~~~~~~~~
If you have Docker already installed, you should already have WSL installed, otherwise open PowerShell and run:

.. code-block:: powershell
  
   wsl --install

> If you already had WSL installed you can install specific linux distribution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already had WSL installed you can install a specific Linux distribution:
```

See the list of possible distributions:

.. code-block:: powershell

  wsl --list --online

> Choose the distribution you would like. Then run the following command. Notice that this installation of dataverse was tried with ubuntu distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choose the distribution you would like. Then run the following command. These instructions were tested with Ubuntu.
```

.. code-block:: powershell

  wsl --install -d <Distribution Name>

> You will be asked to create a linux user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will be asked to create a Linux user.
```

> After installation of Linux check that you have internet connection:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the installation of Linux is complete, check that you have an internet connection:
```

.. code-block:: bash

  ping www.google.com

> If you do not have internet connection try add in ``/etc/wsl.conf``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not have an internet connection try adding it in ``/etc/wsl.conf``
```

.. code-block:: bash
  
  [network]
  generateResolvConf = false

> Also in /etc/resolv.conf add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also in ``/etc/resolv.conf`` add
```

.. code-block:: bash

  nameserver 1.1.1.1

> Now you can install all the tools one usually uses in Linux. For example, it is good idea to run update:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can install all the tools one usually uses in Linux. For example, it is good idea to run an update:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt update
   sudo apt full-upgrade -y

Install Dataverse
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Now you can install Dataverse in WSL following the instructions for :doc:`classic-dev-env`

Reviewer: Classic? Interesting. You aren't using Docker?

Author: Yes, as you know I tried to run Dataverse using Docker, but it did not work for develop branch, but it did seem to work for demo. So I decided to try WSL. But to run Docker inside WSL seemed to be too much, one virtualization on top of another. Also classic installation gives more control such as direct access to database and solr. Surprisingly, WSL works very well for dataverse, I do not see much difference in performance between my ubuntu machine and WSL ubuntu on Windows. I do have better UI windows experience though.

At the end check that you have ``-Ddataverse.pid.default-provider=fake`` in jvm-options.

> Now you can access dataverse in your windows browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can access Dataverse in your Windows browser (Edge, Chrome, etc.):
```

 - http://localhost:8080
 - username: dataverseAdmin
 - password: admin

IDE for Dataverse in Windows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Files in WSL are accessible from Windows for editing using ``\\wsl.localhost`` or ``\\wsl$`` path. Windows files are accessible in linux in ``/mnt/c/`` directory. Therefore one can use one's favorite editor or IDE to edit dataverse project files. Then one can build using ``mvn`` in WSL and deploy manually in WSL using ``asadmin``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Files in WSL are accessible from Windows for editing using ``\\wsl.localhost`` or ``\\wsl$`` path. Windows files are accessible under Linux in the ``/mnt/c/`` directory. Therefore one can use one's favorite editor or IDE to edit Dataverse project files. Then one can build using ``mvn`` in WSL and deploy manually in WSL using ``asadmin``.
```

> It is still though possible to use full strength of IDE, the following instructions are for Intelij users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is still though possible to use a full-strength IDE. The following instructions are for Intellij users.
```

- Install Intelij in Windows.

> You can open the project through ``\\wsl.localhost`` and navigate to dataverse project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can open the project through ``\\wsl.localhost`` and navigate to Dataverse project.
```

> You can try to build the project in Intelij. You may get a message ``Cannot establish network connection from WSL to Windows host (could be blocked by firewall).`` In that case you can try

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can try to build the project in Intellij. You may get a message ``Cannot establish network connection from WSL to Windows host (could be blocked by firewall).`` In that case you can try
```

to disable WSL Hyperviser from firewall.

> After that you should be able to build the project in Intelij.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that you should be able to build the project in Intellij.
```

> It seems that at present it is impossible to deploy the glassfish application in Intelij. You can try to add Glassfish plugin through Settings->Plugins and in Run->Edit Configurations configure Application Server from WSL ``/usr/localhost/payara6`` with URL http://localhost:8080 and Server Domain as domian one, but it may fail since Intelij confuses the Windows and Linux paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It seems that at present it is impossible to deploy the Glassfish application in Intellij. You can try to add Glassfish plugin through Settings->Plugins and in Run->Edit Configurations configure Application Server from WSL ``/usr/localhost/payara6`` with URL http://localhost:8080 and Server Domain as domain1, but it may fail since Intellij confuses the Windows and Linux paths.
```

> To use the full strength of Intelij with build, deployment and debugging, one will need to use Intelij ``Remote development``. Close all the projects in InteliJ and go to ``Remote development->WSL`` and press ``New Project``. In WSL instance choose your linux distribution and press ``Next``. In ``Prpject Directory`` navigate to WSL dataverse project.Then press ``Download IDE and Connect``. This will install InteliJ in WSL in ``~/.cache/JetBrains/``. Now in InteliJ you should see your project opened in a new InteliJ window. After adding Glassfish plugin and editing configuration you should be able to build the project and run the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the full strength of Intelij with build, deployment and debugging, one will need to use Intelij ``Remote development``. Close all the projects in Intellij and go to ``Remote development->WSL`` and press ``New Project``. In WSL instance choose your Linux distribution and press ``Next``. In ``Prpject Directory`` navigate to WSL Dataverse project. Then press ``Download IDE and Connect``. This will install Intellij in WSL in ``~/.cache/JetBrains/``. Now in Intellij you should see your project opened in a new Intellij window. After adding Glassfish plugin and editing configuration you should be able to build the project and run the project.
```

PgAdmin in Windows for Dataverse
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can access dataverse database from Windows. Install pgAdmin https://www.pgadmin.org/download/pgadmin-4-windows/ In pgAdmin register server using 127.0.0.1 with port 5432, database dvndb and dvnapp as username with secret password. Now you will be able to access and update dataverse database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access The Dataverse database from Windows. Install pgAdmin https://www.pgadmin.org/download/pgadmin-4-windows/ In pgAdmin register a server using 127.0.0.1 with port 5432, database dvndb and dvnapp as username with secret password. Now you will be able to access and update Dataverse database. 
```
